So we've had our fair share of race conditions and one of the latest ones that we fixed is this one
in the saving wrapper.
But students are still having some and it depends basically on your setup.
You might be doing something slightly differently to me and be getting a race condition that's probably
because you don't yet understand what can cause them and the situations we have to look out for.
Be careful for and what guidelines we can put in place to prevent ourselves from having these race conditions.
So that's what the subject of this lecture and the subsequent lectures is going to be.
Basically what are hazards and race conditions.
Okay.
Well hazards that's a new word was a data hazard.
Well this is a word that comes from CPR you architecture and it's pretty much about the dependency of
data between instructions.
So there are a few different types of hazard.
The first one is what's known as a read after right has it and this is the situation where you have
one line of code which does a right to variable a and then a subsequent line of code that reads from
a.
That's what's called a read after right because the read happens after the right.
Now obviously if you change the order of these two lines of code then you are going to get a problem
because A is going to get the wrong value it's going to get a different value B will end up with a different
value and your code has changed in functionality.
There is another type of hazard called a right after right conflict and this one's quite odd but basically
it is if you are writing to a variable and then subsequently writing a variable a again with a new value
you would expect that after this you have the value from the second right not the first.
If you reorder those obviously that goes wrong and actually we've had an example of this and I will
show you later on we've had an example of a right after right we've had an example of a read after right
as well.
Now the final one which is very rare and I'm just mentioning it for completeness sake is a right after
read conflict.
In this case we are expecting to write to a variable after we have read from it.
If we reorder it basically what happens is that this first read will have a different value and that
doesn't make sense but we rarely see these kinds of conflicts at least in our code but we mostly see
read after rights and right after rights.
Now this is just a bit of jargon but it's gonna help us understand the underpinnings of why these things
go wrong in the first place.
So when can we get a race condition happening in our code because this isn't on a CPSU and we're not
doing multi threaded stuff so we don't expect things to be coming in and happening at the same time.
But there are race conditions still because we can sometimes expect things to happen in a certain order.
So for example I have a start method here that rights to variable a by the way this is the exact example
from the read after right from the previous night.
So in writings a in starts and we're reading from a to calculate B in update B and you might say Well
that seems ok no race condition there but you'd be wrong because we might have a start method of a different
class calling update B and because we don't know which order this is going to happen in is this update
going to get called first or is this update going to get called first.
We got a race condition basically based on completely arbitrary factors which is no good.
So what's required for a race condition is that we have a little bit of state that is being written
too and usually it is being written to in a method like start or awake that we don't know the order
that they happen in between classes.
So start is a good example of something that could have its order easily flipped around.
And so then we have to combine that state is being set in start with some where where it could be either
written two or read from in a public method and that public method could easily be called from start
even if it's not being called from start.
Now it could be in future.
So what I'd like to do is as a challenge can you find any races in the code that are outstanding or
that we have previously fixed.
So look for any start awake methods.
That's the first place you're going to go.
I'd like you to find the ones that are writing to some state and then finally is there anything that
could race with this.
Is there a public method that also writes to the state or reads from this state.
Is there any way that it could be racing.
See if there is a race condition and if you actually find one that's great.
Go ahead and post it in the forum and say Yeah found a race condition in my code.
Here is where it is now.
This can be quite laborious process.
So in the next lecture I'm going to go over some guidelines to prevent us from actually writing these
kinds of race conditions.
OK suppose Vidya and her go okay.
Welcome back.
So the first place I'm thinking of that we have fixed.
I'm gonna go through the ones that we already noticed and fixed first of all we have base stats.
So what was happening in base stats.
Well start is a start method obviously.
We were writing some state which was current level to initialize our current level but current level
was being read from in various locations.
It was being read from in private update level but that's private so it couldn't have been read from
out of here.
You do have to be careful of the things that call update level as well because that could be called
in start.
Who knows maybe on experience gained would be called in start in which case we would be reading current
level in start and we have the potential for a read after right conflict.
But the actual place we had at issue was in debt level.
So get level was actually being read in start.
If we right click on it and find all references we can see where that was.
It was in the level display no it wasn't in that level display where was grade level being called Oh
I think yes it's one of these examples get level is actually being called Inside base stats and base
get base stat.
It's being called within get stat and get stat itself find all references is being called within.
I believe the start of health.
They go.
So that's your race condition.
You've got the start of health and you've got the start of base stats which is setting current level
so they're both essentially accessing current level you can't really see it is quite buried down very
deeply which is why we need some guidelines.
So what are these guidelines.
Well the first guideline is we never ever call any methods in a wake.
Well we do call some methods in awake but we never call any methods that are on mono behaviors or scripts
of all objects.
These two types both themselves have awake methods.
So there is the potential for race conditions.
If we call things in a wake.
So we use awake exclusively for setting up ourselves with data that we already have.
And that's all we should do in a week.
Now all state should be safe to access by the time we get to see all the starts being called.
So that means that we would need to be really careful we need to check all uses of variables that are
initialized in start.
So for example we have health points which is being initialized in start.
We need to be really careful about where this is getting used because basically it's not safe to read
this at start time.
It's only state for read it after our staff has been executed and that's no good because it could race
with other starts.
So we need to find some ways of protecting things like this sort of like we did with current level that
has been protected because we had current level being calculated in start but we also calculated it
from the ghetto.
So anytime we use this getter we are automatically calculating we're going to find a more robust way
of doing this in the long term.
But for now I'm going to leave it at that for this lecture we now have got an overview of what data
hazards are and how race conditions occur especially in start and awake methods.
In the next lecture we're going to be looking at sanitizing our usage of awake so I will see that.